PARQUET-2489:  Guidance on feature releases (#258)
apache/parquet-format: CONTRIBUTING.md

   of the PMC any open source Parquet implementation may be acceptable.
   Implementations whose contributors actively participate in the community
   (e.g. keep their feature matrix up-to-date on parquet-site) are more likely
   to be considered. If discussed as a requirement in step one demonstration
   of integration with a query engine is also required for this step.

Unless otherwise discussed, it is expected the implementations will develop from
the main branch (i.e. backporting is not expected).

3. After the first two steps are complete a formal vote is held on the Parquet
   mailing list to officially ratify the feature.  After the vote passes the
   format change is merged into the parquet-format repository and it is expected
   the changes from step 2 will also be merged soon after. Before merging into
   Parquet-java a parquet-format release must be performed.

#### General guidelines/preferences on additions.

1. To the greatest extent possible changes should have an option for forwards
   compatibility (old readers can still read files).
2. New encodings should be fully specified in this repository and ideally not

>    rely on an external dependencies for implementation (i.e. Parquet is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   rely on an external dependencies for implementation (i.e. `parquet-format` is the
```

   source of truth for the encoding).
3. New compression mechanisms must have a pure Java implementation that can be
   used as dependency in parquet-java.

### Releases

The Parquet community aims to do releases of the format package only as needed
when new features are introduced. If multiple new features are being proposed
simultaneously some features might be consolidated into the same release.
Guidance is provided below on when implementations should enable features added
to the specification.  Due to confusion in the past over parquet versioning it
is not expected that there will be a 3.0 release of the specification in the

> foreseeable future.

Reviewer: Given there seems to be confusion about what even constitutes a parquet "release" maybe we simply should say that the parquet-format has no overall release version identifier and instead is a collection of individual features?

Or maybe we should give it a version date ("parquet-format as of 2024-06-07" etc) 🤔

Author: I think at least for parquet-java we need a version identifier compatible with Maven because I think that is how it is consumed.  We can maybe discuss separately just inlining the generated code there as well, as i think that is typically what other distributions do?

Author: CC @wgtmac thoughts on this?

Author: Thinking more about this, I think releases are also potentially helpful for any third-party java implementations beyond parquet java.  I don't have strong feelings here.

Reviewer 2: Although the version identifier of parquet-format is compatible with Maven, it looks much weaker than usual Java libraries. IMO, a new version of parquet-format usually includes a set of new feature additions and format clarification/correction, meaning that a new version should be a good superset of previous versions. Therefore we should always stick to the latest version of parquet-format wherever possible. An exception is the deprecation of features to the format where a major version bump is required.

### Compatibility and Feature Enablement

For the purposes of this discussion we classify features into the following buckets:

1. Backwards compatible. A file written under an older version of the format
   should be readable under a newer version of the format.
2. Forwards compatible. A file written under a newer version of the format with
   the enabled feature can be read under an older version of the format, but
   some information might be missing or performance might be suboptimal.
3. Forward incompatible. A file written under a new version of the format with
   the feature enabled cannot be read under and older version of the format
   (e.g. Adding a new compression algorithm.

> The Parquet community hopes that new features are widely beneficial to users of

Reviewer: I think trying to create a process to roll out a feature across all implementations is an admirable goal, however I am not sure there is sufficient consensus to include it in this document. If we include this (aspirational) process I fear there is a non trivial chance it would not be followed in practice, and thus its inclusion would be confusing

Thus I suggest we consider not including the rollout in docs

Author: I tried to remove almost all prescriptions that actually require effort out of the suggestions.  I feel that if we don't provide some guidance the ecosystem will never really move forward.  If possible it would be nice to focus on concrete concerns.  Are there any parts of what is documented here that you see as problematic as a maintainer from arrow-rs?  Also @pitrou anything you see as specifically problematic from a parquet-cpp perspective?

Reviewer: Thank you for the update. However, it is my opinion that the updated text still adds more potential for confusion than it adds. Specifically trying to proscribe the rollout cadence across loosly (at best) coordinated implementations in a document is unlikely to change behaviors and is likely to create confusion

> Are there any parts of what is documented here that you see as problematic as a maintainer from arrow-rs?

One specific example is the mention of feature flags. While I am sure we could over come the technical details, as a maintainer I would not want to be in the position to try and dictate when a featre should be used by our users -- instead I would imagine that as new features were supported in parquet-rs there would be an appropriate writer configuration that users would decide to enable/disable as they deemed appropriate. 

Another potential improvement (orthogonal to this disucssion) would be to label new format additions with the date in which they were added to the spec, and perhaps track the date when support was added to other implementations

Author: > Specifically trying to proscribe the rollout cadence across loosly (at best) coordinated implementations in a document is unlikely to change behaviors and is likely to create confusion

Is there specific language here that you find problematic here? With the latest revision, my intent was to make the recommendation only about preserving compatibility.  i.e. forward incompatible changes must wait at least 2 years before an implementation decides to turn them on by default.  I wonder if changing the phrasing from MAY to MUST NOT USE before would help clarify?  

> instead I would imagine that as new features were supported in parquet-rs there would be an appropriate writer configuration that users would decide to enable/disable as they deemed appropriate.

I agree.  Maybe this is a terminology issue.  I view feature flag as a type of configuration, and I think I removed all recommendations for when, if ever, an implementation should turn something on by default (please let me know if something is still ambiguous or maybe I missed something in rephrasing).

> Another potential improvement (orthogonal to this disucssion) would be to label new format additions with the date in which they were added to the spec, and perhaps track the date when support was added to other implementations

Agreed, I'll add this to the process I thought the feature matrix that was already underreview would be a good place for this?  I would like to avoid putting too many dates directly in the spec to avoid confusion.

Author: I'll try to rephrase to make the issues above clearer.

> I also think the major version bump suggestion is so library specific it is not worth putting in the guidance. The libraries have their own cadence (e.g. parquet-rs and parquet-cpp have major releases based on calendar cycles rather than feature content)

My intent here was not to specify a release cadence but to specify that if changing a forward incompatible change to default the next release must be a major version release, I will try to clarify.  I think parquet-rs and parquet-cpp trivially satisfy this given the current release policies.

Author: @alamb thanks for feedback, I've update to clarify and remove upper case for SHOULD/MAY language, please let me know if the current iteration still raises concerns.

Parquet, and therefore third-party implementations will adopt them quickly after
they are introduced. It is assumed that most new features will be implemented
behind a feature flag that defaults to "off" and at some future point the

> features are turned on by default. To avoid, compatibility issues across the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
features are turned on by default. To avoid compatibility issues across the
```

### License
By contributing your code, you agree to license your contribution under the terms of the APLv2:
https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/LICENSE

### Additions/Changes to the Format

Note: This section applies to actual functional changes to the specification.
Fixing typos, grammar, and clarifying concepts that would not change the
semantics of the specification can be done as long a comitter feels comfortable
to merge them. When in doubt starting a discussion on the dev mailing list is
encouraged.

The general steps for adding features to the format are as follows:

1. Discuss changes on on the developer mailing list (dev@parquet.apache.org).
   Often times it is helpful to link to a draft pull request to make the
   discussion concrete. This step is complete when there lazy consensus. Part
   of the consensus is whether it sufficient to provide 2 working
   implementations as outlined in step 2 or if demonstration of the feature
   with a down-stream query engine is necessary to justify the feature (e.g.
   demonstrate performance improvements in Arrow's DataSet library or
   Apache Data Fusion).

> 2. Once a change has lazy consensus two implementations of the feature

Reviewer 3: One thing that's a little confusing to me is the sequencing - is the expectation that the 2 implementations implement the feature first before it's introduced into the standard? Or is it expected that the format is released with 2 implements "verbally" (or over email) committing to implement the new feature?

Author: I'll clarify my suggestion (and what is common for new features recently) is two open PRs for the implementations, so more then a verbal commitment

Author: This is clarified now.

   used as dependency in parquet-java.

### Releases

The Parquet community aims to do releases of the format package only as needed
when new features are introduced. If multiple new features are being proposed
simultaneously some features might be consolidated into the same release.
Guidance is provided below on when implementations should enable features added
to the specification.  Due to confusion in the past over parquet versioning it
is not expected that there will be a 3.0 release of the specification in the
foreseeable future.

### Compatibility and Feature Enablement

For the purposes of this discussion we classify features into the following buckets:

1. Backwards compatible. A file written under an older version of the format
   should be readable under a newer version of the format.
2. Forwards compatible. A file written under a newer version of the format with
   the enabled feature can be read under an older version of the format, but
   some information might be missing or performance might be suboptimal.
3. Forward incompatible. A file written under a new version of the format with
   the feature enabled cannot be read under and older version of the format

>    (e.g. Adding a new compression algorithm.

Reviewer 3: missing a closing ")"

Author: I think I fixed this.

### License
By contributing your code, you agree to license your contribution under the terms of the APLv2:
https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/LICENSE

### Additions/Changes to the Format

Note: This section applies to actual functional changes to the specification.
Fixing typos, grammar, and clarifying concepts that would not change the
semantics of the specification can be done as long a comitter feels comfortable
to merge them. When in doubt starting a discussion on the dev mailing list is
encouraged.

The general steps for adding features to the format are as follows:

1. Discuss changes on the developer mailing list (dev@parquet.apache.org).
   Often times it is helpful to link to a draft pull request to make the
   discussion concrete. This step is complete when there is lazy consensus. Part
   of the consensus is whether it sufficient to provide 2 working
   implementations as outlined in step 2 or if demonstration of the feature with

>    a down-stream query engine is necessary to justify the feature (e.g.

Reviewer 4: This is overly specific IMHO. Not all features are developed in relation with a "down-stream query engine". For example, the BYTE_STREAM_SPLIT additions were motivated by size measurements with different encodings and compression algorithms.

Author: Right, I think a lot of features will not need this per @etseidl point on a previous revision, this helps avoid extraneous features that sound good in practice but don't provide much value in practice.  Other areas where this is more likely to apply could be for more complicated indexing schemes.

   demonstrate performance improvements in Arrow's DataSet library or Apache
   Data Fusion or another open source engine).

2. Once a change has lazy consensus, two implementations of the feature
   demonstrating interopability must also be provided.  One implementation MUST
   be [parquet-java](http://github.com/apache/parquet-java).  It is preferred
   that the second implementation be
   [parquet-cpp](https://github.com/apache/arrow) or
   [parquet-rs](https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs), however at the discretion
   of the PMC any open source Parquet implementation may be acceptable.
   Implementations whose contributors actively participate in the community

>    (e.g. keep their feature matrix up-to-date on parquet-site) are more likely

Reviewer 4: Either link to the parquet-site GH repo, or change to "the Parquet website".

Author: used the Parquet website.

   to be considered. If discussed as a requirement in step one, demonstration

>    of integration with a query engine is also required for this step. The
>    implementations must be made available publicly (e.g. as a pull request
>    against the target repository).

Reviewer 4: We might be more specific here to avoid giving the impression that a "code dump" is sufficient to get a format change to be accepted, though perhaps I'm overly cautious :-)
```suggestion
   of integration with a query engine is also required for this step. The
   implementations must be made available publicly, and they should
   be fit for inclusion (for example, they were submitted as a pull request
   against the target repository and committers gave positive reviews).
```

Unless otherwise discussed, it is expected the implementations will develop from
the main branch (i.e. backporting is not expected).

3. After the first two steps are complete a formal vote is held on the Parquet

>    mailing list to officially ratify the feature.  After the vote passes the

Reviewer 4: We should make mailing-list references more consistent. Is it "the Parquet development mailing-list"? Or `dev@parquet.apache.org`?

Author: I tried to be consistent using dev@parquet.apache.org

   format change is merged into the parquet-format repository and it is expected
   the changes from step 2 will also be merged soon after. Before merging into

>    Parquet-java a parquet-format release must be performed.

Reviewer 4: I don't think rules specific to parquet-java development should leak into the format repo.

Reviewer 2: Instead of mentioning parquet-java specifically, should we say `implementations shouldn't merge new features until the proposal to parquet-format has been merged`? 

My concern is on how implementation adopts the generated code of parquet.thrift. Parquet-java does not have this issue because it always depends on a released version of parquet-format. However, parquet-cpp has to manually synchronize parquet.thrift with slight change (e.g. package name) and we should be careful not to include unmerged format change.

Author: I tried to add this language.

#### General guidelines/preferences on additions.

1. To the greatest extent possible changes should have an option for forwards
   compatibility (old readers can still read files).

2. New encodings should be fully specified in this repository and ideally not
   rely on an external dependencies for implementation (i.e. `parquet-format` is
   the source of truth for the encoding).

3. New compression mechanisms must have a pure Java implementation that can be

>    used as dependency in parquet-java.

Author: I haven't audited myself, on the discussion it was asserted it was the case for parquet-java.

### Releases

The Parquet PMC aims to do releases of the format package only as needed when
new features are introduced. If multiple new features are being proposed
simultaneously some features might be consolidated into the same release.
Guidance is provided below on when implementations should enable features added
to the specification.  Due to confusion in the past over parquet versioning it
is not expected that there will be a 3.x release of the specification in the
foreseeable future.

### Compatibility and Feature Enablement

For the purposes of this discussion we classify features into the following buckets:

1. Backwards compatible. A file written under an older version of the format
   should be readable under a newer version of the format.

2. Forwards compatible. A file written under a newer version of the format with

>    the enabled feature can be read under an older version of the format, but

Reviewer 4: Potentially incorrect nit :-)
```suggestion
   the feature enabled can be read under an older version of the format, but
```

   some information might be missing or performance might be suboptimal.

> 3. Forward incompatible. A file written under a new version of the format with
>    the feature enabled cannot be read under an older version of the format (e.g.
>    Adding a new compression algorithm).

Reviewer 4: Nits: let's be consistent
```suggestion
3. Forwards incompatible. A file written under a newer version of the format with
   the feature enabled cannot be read under an older version of the format (e.g.
   adding and using a new compression algorithm).
```

New features are intended to be widely beneficial to users of Parquet, and
therefore it is hoped third-party implementations will adopt them quickly after
they are introduced. It is assumed that writing new parts of the format, and

> especially forward incompatible features, will be configured with feature flag

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
especially forward incompatible features, will be configured with a feature flag
```

> defaulted to "off" and at some future point the features are turned on by default

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
defaulted to "off", and at some future point the feature is turned on by default
```

(reading of the new feature will typically be enabled without configuration or
defaulted to on). Some amount of lead time is desirable to ensure a critical

> mass of Parquet implementations support a feature to avoid compatability issues

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
mass of Parquet implementations support a feature to avoid compatibility issues
```

across the ecosystem.  Therefore, the Parquet PMC gives the following
recommendations for managing features:

1. Backwards compatibility is the concern of implementations but given the
   ubiquity of Parquet and the length of time it has been used, libraries should

>    support reading older version of the format to the greatest extent possible.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   support reading older versions of the format to the greatest extent possible.
```

> 2. Forward compatible features/changes may be used by default in implementations

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Forwards compatible features/changes may be enabled and used by default in implementations
```

   once the parquet-format containing those changes has been formally released.
   For features that may pose a significant performance regression to older
   format readers, libaries should consider delaying default enablement until 1

>    year after the release of the parquet-java implementation that contains the

Reviewer 4: I'm still skeptical that this should suggest a precise delay for third-party implementations. Or, alternatively, replace "should" with "may"?

Author: I think this is a point of discussion.  I'm OK changing the language either way but would like to get more opinions before doing so.  I think specifying some timeline is important, even if non-binding for third party implementations as it gives third-parties a sense of timeline for adopting features.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps we can either invite more parties to this discussion, or raise it on the ML?

Author: Yes, I'll plan on doing one more pass to address open comments then start a discuss thread on the mailing list (hopefully I will have time to do this today)

   feature implementation.

3. Forwards incompatible features/changes should not be turned on by default

>    until 2 years after the parquet-java implementation containing the feature is

Reviewer 4: Still skeptical about a delay.

Author: Per above, I can understand the skepticism, I'd like to get more opinions here and we can update accordingly.

Reviewer 5: We could add a shortcut like "or a PMC vote was in favour of it". If something gets really fast adoption, then we could enable it sooner.

How did you come up with "2 years"? Was this a guess or a deeper reasoning behind it?

Reviewer: My suggestion is to avoid this sentence and just start with "It is recommended that changing the default value for a forward incompatible feature flag should be clearly advertised to consumers..."

Otherwise, this could be read as "any change made to parquet will not even plausibly be used for at least two years". I think it would be a shame if people used this 2 years as a reason to slow down their adoption of new parquet features

I think parquet would be better off if we let market demand drive the proliferation of features rather than trying to control a rollout. The thinking is that if new files begin appearing that are not readable by some system that is lagging, it would be beneficial to add pressure on that system upgrading their support

Author: > We could add a shortcut like "or a PMC vote was in favour of it". If something gets really fast adoption, then we could enable it sooner.

I think we should either do away with the guidance or release it.  PMC can always modify the language necessary via vote if necessary, but I'm not sure there is a good scenario where we want to actively break guidance?

> How did you come up with "2 years"? Was this a guess or a deeper reasoning behind it?

Mostly guesstimate and it might actually be too short.  This assumes a least some downstream dependencies only do major releases on a yearly basis as well.  So it leaves time for a downstream system to pickup a release in the following year and then ~1 year for rollout.   Taking Spark as an example, it appears to average about 3.5 years beetween major releases.  Minor releases are aimed at every six-months, but not everyone is going to use a release immediately.  If you look at [EMR](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/emr/latest/ReleaseGuide/emr-spark.html) ignoring the LTE release of 2.4.8, they are currently supporting 3.5.0 and 3.4.1. 3.4.1 was released  9 months ago and ~1 year ago respectively.   [Dataproc](https://cloud.google.com/dataproc/docs/concepts/versioning/dataproc-version-clusters), explicitly supports images for 24 months, but the actual Spark versions are older then AWS (i.e. 3.3)

If we do a parquet 2.0 release with a breaking change, we will probably learn how long it has taken people to actually adopt some of the newer breaking features.

> I think parquet would be better off if we let market demand drive the proliferation of features rather than trying to control a rollout. The thinking is that if new files begin appearing that are not readable by some system that is lagging, it would be beneficial to add pressure on that system upgrading their support

I think this ignores how long it takes changes to roll through the ecosystem, I detailed more in my reply on why 2 years above.  I'd welcome people to start experimenting features early but I think not recommending at least some delay will cause a lot of unnecessary pain.

Reviewer: > I think this ignores how long it takes changes to roll through the ecosystem, I detailed more in my reply on why 2 years above

I am quite sure that stable mature enterprise platforms will take 2+ years to adopt any changes. However, this doesn't mean we should offer guidance that the entire ecosystem should follow that pace. 

Instead I think we (the parquet community) should offer help / visibility into how far the feature has percolated through the ecosystem (e.g. by a compatibility matrix) rather than some prescriptive proposal of a rollout schedule.

Author: > The thinking is that if new files begin appearing that are not readable by some system that is lagging, it would be beneficial to add pressure on that system upgrading their support

Having a not-before date published is a means of applying pressure without breaking anything.  I think it is much more reasonable messaging for downstream consumers to say, "you are seeing files that you can't read because you haven't updated your software for a long time".  It seems less reasonable to me to say to someone you are seeing "files you can't read because we a new feature was designed and implemented last month and we decided to make it default so  you should upgrade your software as well and/or contribute an implementation to the software you are using".  Also, maintainers have differing priorities, motivations and bandwidth.  "Pressuring" them because things are broken immediately rather than giving a reasonable time frame for implementation does not seem to me to be a considerate thing to do.

> I am quite sure that stable mature enterprise platforms will take 2+ years to adopt any changes. However, this doesn't mean we should offer guidance that the entire ecosystem should follow that pace.

Perhaps there is more word-smithing needed here.  This guidance is about when forward incompatible files should start being written by **default**. I expect that early adopters will opt into features sooner, especially if new features are appropriately publicized.  Early adopters are also usually more sophisticated and can better assess the risks for there use-case. There is already language here saying users can decide for themselves if they are sure they are using Parquet in a closed ecosystem (maybe it can be strengthened?).  I am more concerned about late adopters. I'd love to see new features "on" by default, but I just don't think it is serves the broader ecosystem well to do so.  As a  point of reference even two years might not be sufficient as seen by https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/7953 (part of this is likely partially caused over confusion of "V2").  

> Instead I think we (the parquet community) should offer help / visibility into how far the feature has percolated through the ecosystem (e.g. by a compatibility matrix) rather than some prescriptive proposal of a rollout schedule.

I think both are useful. A matrix doesn't help further adoption without a mechanism for guiding when a feature should be turned on by default.  I think it is especially difficult without more contextualized information about relative popularity of readers (e.g. if a parquet haskell implementation is lagging behind on a feature should it give pause for enablement). 

Ultimately, implementations not under the governance of the Parquet PMC are free to do what they want but I think providing official and consistent guidance here to give some lead time for breaking changes is in the best interest of everyone using Parquet.  

To annotate some of the options already suggested on the thread:
1.  Don't provide guidance.  I think this will result in either the current status quo which is to never turn anything on by default OR lead to many incompatibilities across the ecosystem.
2. PMC votes on when to recommend a feature be turned on (possibly informed by feature matrix?).  I don't think this provides consistency (or if there is a consistent  means of making decision we should simply document it here and avoid the overhead of votes).
3. Time based implementation/implementations.  Provides a consistent criteria that other implementations can understand and take action on.

Reviewer 2: IMO, the 2-year guidance is better than other options. We don't want individual votes or discussions for action of each new feature. In addition, developers (of downstream projects or other Parquet implementation not governed under Parquet PMC) usually do not actively keep an eye on Parquet activities. The general 2-year guidance may give people enough time to take action to changes on the Parquet side.

Author: @julienledem ultimately whatever time period we pick is going to be arbitrary, but do you have a concrete suggestion.  

> We could have a setting to adjust this in environments where there is a single system reading/writing parquet: setForwardIncompatibleFeaturesOnByDefault(boolean)

This seems like a implementation specific thing but I'm not sure a global setting is the right thing to do here.  This is probably a discussion to have specifically around what we want to do in different parquet implementations.

Author: 1. We should be explicit about after turning on by default libraries are encouraged to enable turning it off.
2. I think we should wait on specific policies that parquet-cpp and parquet-java will definitively turn these things.

Author: Updated to include recommendation for 1. 

For full deprecation I made a note we will update the document for further timeline.

   released. It is recommended that changing the default value for a forward

>    incompatible feature flag be done as part of a major release of an

Reviewer 4: Given that "major release" is vague and potentially misleading, I would remove this recommendation as it is not really helpful for implementors, IMHO.

Author: I'll see if I can rephrase to something more reasonable otherwise we can remove it.

Author: I tried to rephrase by only giving examples, let me know if you think this language is still too strong or still not helpful.

   implementation (it is out of the scope for this guidance on how and when
   implementations decide to do releases).

> For forward compatible changes which have a high chance of performance

Reviewer 4: "Forward" or "forwards"? Should be consistent accross this document.

Author: I'll try to do an audit I think one might sound better in some usages then another.

Reviewer 4: Fair enough (not a native speaker here :-))

Author: Tried to standardize on "forward" when rereading I didn't see much benefit to split the difference.

regression for older readers and forward incompatible changes implementations
should clearly document the compatibility issues and should consider logging a

> warning when such a feature is used. Additionally, while it is up to maintainers

Reviewer 4: Uh, warnings are generally distracting and harmful if they do not actually tell the user about something unexpected. Especially, if the user explicitly enabled the feature, they should definition *not* be shown a warning patronizing them (at least, I would strongly recommend against this in Parquet C++ or PyArrow).

Author: I'll remove the logging section.

Author: Removed.

   used as dependency in parquet-java.

### Releases

The Parquet PMC aims to do releases of the format package only as needed when
new features are introduced. If multiple new features are being proposed
simultaneously some features might be consolidated into the same release.
Guidance is provided below on when implementations should enable features added
to the specification.  Due to confusion in the past over Parquet versioning it
is not expected that there will be a 3.x release of the specification in the
foreseeable future.

### Compatibility and Feature Enablement

For the purposes of this discussion we classify features into the following buckets:

1. Backwards compatible. A file written under an older version of the format
   should be readable under a newer version of the format.

2. Forwards compatible. A file written under a newer version of the format with
   the feature enabled can be read under an older version of the format, but
   some information might be missing or performance might be suboptimal.

3. Forwards incompatible. A file written under a newer version of the format with
   the feature enabled cannot be read under an older version of the format (e.g.

>    adding and using a new compression algorithm).

Reviewer 6: One clarifying question here - does "cannot be read under an older version of the format" allow for "cannot be read _correctly_ under an older version of the format"? I suspect we want that be considered a breaking change.

For reference I have the Arrow spec in mind which [defines](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Versioning.html#forward-compatibility) forward compatibility as "An older client library must be able to either read data generated from a new client library or **detect that it cannot properly read the data.**" (emphasis mine). Is the "detect" case what we're calling "Forwards incompatible" here?

Author: I tried to clarify this.  Forward incompatible features I think should provide a signal to old readers so ideally an appropriate error message can be returned.

### License
By contributing your code, you agree to license your contribution under the terms of the APLv2:
https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/LICENSE

### Additions/Changes to the Format

Note: This section applies to actual functional changes to the specification.
Fixing typos, grammar, and clarifying concepts that would not change the
semantics of the specification can be done as long as a committer feels comfortable
to merge them. When in doubt starting a discussion on the dev mailing list is
encouraged.

The general steps for adding features to the format are as follows:

1. Discuss changes on the developer mailing list (dev@parquet.apache.org).
   Often times it is helpful to link to a draft pull request to make the

>    discussion concrete. This step is complete when there is lazy consensus. Part

Author: I think this depends on the feature.  I added language that a design document could be useful.  I think we can always become more formal here if need be.

>    discussion concrete. This step is complete when there is lazy consensus. Part
>    of the consensus is whether it sufficient to provide 2 working
>    implementations as outlined in step 2 or if demonstration of the feature with
>    a down-stream query engine is necessary to justify the feature (e.g.

Reviewer 4: Nits / typos
```suggestion
   discussion concrete. This step is complete when there is lazy consensus. Part
   of the consensus is whether it is sufficient to provide two working
   implementations as outlined in step 2, or if demonstration of the feature with
   a downstream query engine is necessary to justify the feature (e.g.
```

>    demonstrate performance improvements in Arrow's DataSet library or Apache
>    Data Fusion or another open source engine).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   demonstrate performance improvements in the Apache Arrow C++ Dataset library,
   the Apache DataFusion query engine, or any other open source engine).
```

>    the Apache DataFusion query engine, or any other open source engine).

Author: I tried to address this with additional language, please let me know if I covered your intent.

2. Once a change has lazy consensus, two implementations of the feature

>    demonstrating interopability must also be provided.  One implementation MUST

Author: added language around this please let me know if matches you intent.

   be [`parquet-java`](http://github.com/apache/parquet-java).  It is preferred
   that the second implementation be
   [`parquet-cpp`](https://github.com/apache/arrow) or
   [`parquet-rs`](https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs), however at the discretion
   of the PMC any open source Parquet implementation may be acceptable.
   Implementations whose contributors actively participate in the community
   (e.g. keep their feature matrix up-to-date on the Parquet website) are more

>    likely to be considered. If discussed as a requirement in step one,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   likely to be considered. If discussed as a requirement in step 1 above,
```

   demonstration of integration with a query engine is also required for this
   step. The implementations must be made available publicly, and they should be
   fit for inclusion (for example, they were submitted as a pull request against
   the target repository and committers gave positive reviews).

Unless otherwise discussed, it is expected the implementations will be developed

> from their respective main branch (i.e. backporting is not expected).

Author: I clarified, backporting is not required.  My take is it up to implementations to decide if backporting is desirable/worthwhile.

3. After the first two steps are complete a formal vote is held on
   dev@parquet.apache.org to officially ratify the feature.  After the vote
   passes the format change is merged into the `parquet-format` repository and
   it is expected the changes from step 2 will also be merged soon after
   (implementations should not be merged until the addition has been merged to

>    `parquet-format`).

Author: Yes, this has gone back and forth.  Java currently requires a release.  Other implementations just copy the  bits that are needed into there repos.

#### General guidelines/preferences on additions.

1. To the greatest extent possible changes should have an option for forward

>    compatibility (old readers can still read files).

Author: For deprecating a feature, I would prefer to leave that to a future CL, thus far we've mostly avoided it I think and we can come up with a policy later.  I'm adding a sentence here to point to the later section.  I'll resolve this conversation once I push the new commit (and we can determine if that is sufficient.)

2. New encodings should be fully specified in this repository and ideally not
   rely on an external dependencies for implementation (i.e. `parquet-format` is
   the source of truth for the encoding).

3. New compression mechanisms must have a pure Java implementation that can be

>    used as a dependency in `parquet-java`.

Author: The assertion has been made that all libraries have a Java only fallback for them (and it has been mentioned as a blocker before.  See for instance PCodec discussion on the mailing list.)

>    used as a dependency in `parquet-java`.

Author: I added a sentence here making this more of a suggestion and noting exceptions can be discussed.

### Releases

The Parquet PMC aims to do releases of the format package only as needed when
new features are introduced. If multiple new features are being proposed
simultaneously some features might be consolidated into the same release.
Guidance is provided below on when implementations should enable features added
to the specification.  Due to confusion in the past over Parquet versioning it
is not expected that there will be a 3.x release of the specification in the
foreseeable future.

### Compatibility and Feature Enablement

For the purposes of this discussion we classify features into the following buckets:

1. Backward compatible. A file written under an older version of the format
   should be readable under a newer version of the format.

2. Forward compatible. A file written under a newer version of the format with
   the feature enabled can be read under an older version of the format, but

>    some information might be missing or performance might be suboptimal.

Reviewer 4: If the data should be readable back "without loss", does it imply that new logical types are not considered forward compatible?

>    some information might be missing or performance might be suboptimal.

Reviewer 7: Agreed. a new logical type is not fully forward compatible even if there is a degraded mode (you can ignore it and read the "raw" type). Then we would recommend new logical types to not be turned on by default.

across the ecosystem.  Therefore, the Parquet PMC gives the following
recommendations for managing features:

1. Backward compatibility is the concern of implementations but given the
   ubiquity of Parquet and the length of time it has been used, libraries should
   support reading older versions of the format to the greatest extent possible.

2. Forward compatible features/changes may be enabled and used by default in
   implementations once the parquet-format containing those changes has been
   formally released.  For features that may pose a significant performance
   regression to older format readers, libaries should consider delaying default
   enablement until 1 year after the release of the parquet-java implementation
   that contains the feature implementation.

3. Forward incompatible features/changes should not be turned on by default
   until 2 years after the parquet-java implementation containing the feature is
   released. It is recommended that changing the default value for a forward
   incompatible feature flag should be clearly advertised to consumers (e.g. via
   a major version release if using Semantic Versioning, or highlighed in

>    release notes).

Author: > We are talking of a Parquet V3, but are we thinking to increment a new major version more often for the purpose of making a feature that already exists on by default?

In parquet-java, no more then once per year.  But this is in essence of why we don't want to call anything parquet-v3.  At some point a new incompatible footer will be turned on.  When this is done for libraries that do semver like parquet java, the best way to get people to read the release notes is a major version bump.  I would also argue that according to semver changing the default for a forward incompatible feature really does constitute a major version bump.

>    release notes).

Author: Discussed offline.  I'll add language to be more encouraging of people to turn things on themselves, rather than worrying too much about cadence of on by default.

>    release notes).

Author: I added language discussing adoption below closer to parquet java.

For forward compatible changes which have a high chance of performance
regression for older readers and forward incompatible changes, implementations
should clearly document the compatibility issues. Additionally, while it is up
to maintainers of individual implementations to make the best decision to serve
their ecosystem, they are encouraged to start enabling features by default along
the same timelines as `parquet-java`.  Parquet-java will wait to enable features
by default until the most conservative timelines outlined above have been

> exceeded.

Reviewer 7: I think they should be encourage implementations to enable it as soon as they are comfortable with it and no later than the library unless they have legacy constraints.
The conservative approach in parquet-java is because it has much less visible potential impact.

Using the compatibility matrix to turn things on by default more aggressively when something is quickly adopted is a great idea in my opinion

Author: > I think they should be encourage implementations to enable it as soon as they are comfortable with it and no later than the library unless they have legacy constraints.

Is the library here `parquet-java`.  

> Using the compatibility matrix to turn things on by default more aggressively when something is quickly adopted is a great idea in my opinion

I agree for early adopters it is good, but these are most likely people who understand there dependency stack very well.  I think the issue is even with release dates, these libraries take time to percolate through the ecosystem so being more conservative with language here makes sense to me.  

If you can think of language that might strike a better balance here, I am open to suggestions.

Reviewer 7: > > I think they should be encourage implementations to enable it as soon as they are comfortable with it and no later than the library unless they have legacy constraints.

> Is the library here parquet-java.

Here, I meant the library they're using. So either parquet-java, parquet-rust or parquet-cpp depending on the context.

> I agree for early adopters it is good, but these are most likely people who understand there dependency stack very well. I think the issue is even with release dates, these libraries take time to percolate through the ecosystem so being more conservative with language here makes sense to me.
> If you can think of language that might strike a better balance here, I am open to suggestions.

(Here, I'm considering that most third party implementation are actually integrated in a broader system or query engine)

How about: 

_Additionally, while it is up to maintainers of individual implementations to make the best decision to serve
their ecosystem, they are encouraged to start enabling features by default as soon as potential consumers of the files they produce will be able to read them. They can follow the same timelines as `parquet-java` but should consider that it follows a conservative timeline._

Is this pushing too much the other way?

Author: I am addding language to clarify the guidance is for open source implementations and then adding a sentence:

```
We encourage earlier adoption of new features when 
an organization using Parquet can guarantee that
all readers of the parquet files they produce can read a new 
feature
```

I'll resolve this conversation when we push I push the commit and we can see if further editing is needed.

Author: pushed commit.  resolving.

> For features released prior to October 2024, target dates for each of these

Reviewer 2: I don't quite understand this. Do we expect a parquet-java 2.0 release around October 2024? Doesn't any new feature should follow this guidance once published?

Author: My intent was to try for Parquet-java 2.0 in October.   There are a lot of old features from the spec perspective that based on guidance would be ok to use (e.g. lz4-raw, byte stream split, data page v2, v2 encodings) that we need to decide on recommended dates (as a sample suggestion I would aim for 1 year for features we think we actually want to turn on)

Reviewer 2: Is it a good timing to do Parquet-java 2.0 release? As per the discussion from https://lists.apache.org/thread/kttwbl5l7opz6nwb5bck2gghc2y3td0o, we intend to break the API compatibility by removing deprecated APIs (and remove Java 8 support) in the 2.0 release. If the intention is to set a target date for existing features without breaking anything, perhaps we should release 1.15.0 instead?

cc @gszadovszky @Fokko @julienledem

Author: IMO I think API compatibility is a separate concern and it is fine to set future dates and change API compatibility.  I can rephrase this section to mention some other criteria for initial target dates if there is an alternative proposal?

Reviewer 8: I would be up for a Parquet 2.0 release in October and am eager to help! Do we also want a [1.15](https://github.com/apache/parquet-java/milestone/18)? 

I'm trying to downstream 1.14.1 into various projects (https://github.com/apache/spark/pull/46447, https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/10209), but the new Jackson version is giving us some troubles. It feels to me that the different projects need some time to update. My argument is that releasing 1.15 right now would not give too many new features to the users, and I think it makes sense to jump to 2.0.0.

Since there are some delays mentioned earlier in this document:

- The API that I suggested removing was marked as deprecated almost six years go: https://github.com/apache/parquet-java/pull/535
- We're still compiling against Hadoop 2.7.3 which was released in August 2016.
- I think the Java8 deprecation might be a bit harder and might require more discussion, but there it feels like all the projects are looking at each other :) Spark/Avro are Java 17+ right now.

For my understanding, the things you mentioned (e.g. lz4-raw, byte stream split, data page v2, v2 encodings), they are already shipped with the last release, so the discussion is when to make them the default?

Author: > For my understanding, the things you mentioned (e.g. lz4-raw, byte stream split, data page v2, v2 encodings), they are already shipped with the last release, so the discussion is when to make them the default?

Yes, it is mostly to pick a time-frame where we feel comfortable to make them a default option for choosing when writing new parquet files.  I think at least for encodings we need to convince ourselves which ones are good choices based on benchmarks to be turned on by default.  For data page v2, I think dremio tried enabling this by default and then reverted it (IIRC performance on write, so there might be more work here).

Reviewer 7: Am I correct in understanding that We intend to:
 - increment the major release of parquet-format when it has the definition of the new (forward incompatible) feature in it.
 - implement the above new feature in parquet-java under a minor release in the previous major but turning it off by default
 - increment the major release of parquet-java when we turn on the new encodings by default?

I think this is not unsound but it might be confusing. We should then expect to have several major releases coming: one for the new footer and one for each new encoding.

Author: @julienledem no I think there is a misunderstanding.

> increment the major release of parquet-format when it has the definition of the new (forward incompatible) feature in it.

Per above, I don't think we expect a major version change for parquet-format in the near future.

> implement the above new feature in parquet-java under a minor release in the previous major but turning it off by default

yes, this is correct.  this provides read support.

> increment the major release of parquet-java when we turn on the new encodings by default?

Yes. 

> I think this is not unsound but it might be confusing. We should then expect to have several major releases coming: one for the new footer and one for each new encoding.

I think these should be grouped.  Per https://github.com/apache/parquet-site/pull/61 the proposal for parquet-java is to have at most one major release per year.  Early adopters can use features once a minor release containing them is out as long as they feel comfortable with understanding the scope of impact.

Reviewer 7: Sorry, I'm not following which part of the conversation "per above" refers to here.
Could you point to it and explain what you mean?

I was assuming for example that once we define a new footer in a new format we would increment the format spec. Would that be wrong?

Author: In the releases section:

```
The Parquet PMC aims to do releases of the format package only as needed when
new features are introduced. If multiple new features are being proposed
simultaneously some features might be consolidated into the same release.
Guidance is provided below on when implementations should enable features added
to the specification.  Due to confusion in the past over Parquet versioning it
is not expected that there will be a 3.x release of the specification in the
foreseeable future.
```

Reviewer 7: OK, that sounds good to me.

should clearly document the compatibility issues. Additionally, while it is up
to maintainers of individual implementations to make the best decision to serve
their ecosystem, they are encouraged to start enabling features by default along
the same timelines as `parquet-java`.  Parquet-java will wait to enable features
by default until the most conservative timelines outlined above have been
exceeded.

For features released prior to October 2024, target dates for each of these
categories will be updated as part of the `parquet-java 2.0` release process
based on a collected feature compatibility matrix.

For each release of `parquet-java` or `parquet-format` that influences this
guidance it is expected exact dates will be added to parquet-format to provide
clarity to implementors (e.g. When `parquet-java` 2.X.X is released, any new
format features it uses will be updated with concrete dates). As part of
`parquet-format` releases the compatibility matrix will be updated to contain
the release date in the format. Implementations are also encouraged to provide
implementation date/release version information when updating the feature
matrix.

> End users of software are generally encouraged to follow the same guidance
> detailed above unless they have mechanisms for ensuring the version of all
> possible readers of the Parquet files support the feature they want to enable.
> One way of doing this is to cross-reference feature matrix and any relevant
> vendor documentation.

Reviewer 9: I'm not so sure about this section. How about:
```suggestion
End users of software are generally encouraged to consult the feature matrix
and vendor documentation before enabling features that are not yet widely
adopted.
```

### License
By contributing your code, you agree to license your contribution under the terms of the APLv2:
https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/LICENSE

### Additions/Changes to the Format

The general steps for adding features to the format are as follows:

1. Discuss changes on on the developer mailing list (dev@parquet.apache.org).  Often times it is helpful to link to a draft pull request to make the discussion concrete. This step is complete when there lazy consensus.

2. One a change has lazy consensus two implementations of the feature

> demonstrating interopability must also be provided.  One implementation MUST be [parquet-java](http://github.com/apache/parquet-java).  It is preferred that the second implementation be [parquet-cpp](https://github.com/apache/arrow) or [parquet-rs](https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs), however at the discretion of the PMC any

Reviewer 10: Does this mean features are implemented on main branch or released or we want to stay ambiguous and see what works in practice?

Reviewer 2: IMHO, it should be on the main branch. It is not common practice to port new (unstable) features to a maintenance branch.

Author: Agree, I was assuming main branch.

Author: tried to clarify.  PTAL.

> open source Parquet implementation may be acceptable.

Reviewer 9: Could extra consideration be given to implementations that maintain their column in the feature matrix?

Author: This sounds reasonable to me and I can update that as secondary option (ultimately this is the realm of the PMC)

Author: @etseidl I updated the language, please let me know if this looks reasonable.

Reviewer 9: Thank you @emkornfield, the addition looks great to me.

3. After the first two steps are complete a formal vote is held on the Parquet mailing list to officially
ratify the feature.  After the vote passes the format change is merged into the parquet-format repository

> and it is expected the change in step 2 will also be merged soon after.

Reviewer 2: parquet-java would have to wait until the next release of parquet-format because it cannot depend on the SNAPSHOT version.

Author: This is a good point that I missed.  Thank you.  I'll update this to point out that a release of the format is required for merging into parquet-java.

Author: I indicated this in the instructions.  Given that this advocates releasing the format as features are added, hopefully this won't be a blocker?

### Compatibility and Feature Enablement

For the purposes of this discussion we classify features into the following buckets:

1. Backwards compatible.  A file written by an older version of a library can be read by a newer version of the
library.

2. Forwards compatible.  A file written by a new version of the library can be read by an older version
of the library. 

3. Forwards compatible with suboptimal performance. A file written by a new version of the library can
be read an older version of the library but performance might be suboptimal (e.g. statistics might be missing
from the older reader's perspective).

4. Forwards incompatible. A file written with a new version of the library cannot be read by an older version
of the library.

Backwards compatibility is the concern of implementations but given the ubiquity of Parquet and the length
of time it has been used, libraries SHOULD always support reading older format versions.

The Parquet PMC recommends the following guidance for using features defined in the specification.

1. Forwards compatible changes MAY be used by default in implementations once the parquet-format containing

> those changes has been formally released. These features SHOULD be turned on 1 year after the parquet-java

Reviewer 10: By `SHOULD be turned on` do you mean turned on by default or implemented by the implementation?

Author: I'll clarify but I mean turned on by default.  I hope implementations add the features soon after introduction.

Author: I tried to clarify please let me know if the language makes sense.

### License
By contributing your code, you agree to license your contribution under the terms of the APLv2:
https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/LICENSE

### Additions/Changes to the Format

> The general steps for adding features to the format are as follows:

Reviewer 9: Is it worth leading this off with something to the effect that minor changes to the spec (fixing typos, providing clarification) can be made at the discretion of the committers without the need for a more formal process? Or is that just obvious?

Author: It can't hurt to be explicit.

Author: This is incorporated.

of time it has been used, libraries SHOULD support reading older
file variants.

2. Forward compatible changes MAY be used by default in implementations once the parquet-format containing
those changes has been formally released. These features SHOULD be turned on 1 year after the parquet-java
implementation containing feature is released (e.g. it is expected
the Java implementation itself will turn them on for the first
release 1 year after a features initial introduction).

3. Forward compatible with suboptimal performance features MAY be made default after 
the parquet-java implementation containing the feature is released. Features in this category
SHOULD be turned on 1 year after the parquet-java
implementation containing the feature is released.  Implementations MAY choose
to do a major version bump when turning on a feature in this category.

4. Forwards incompatible changes MAY be made default 2 years after the parquet-java
implementation containing the feature is released. Features in this category SHOULD be turned on by 
default 3 years after the parquet-java implementation containing feature is released. Implementations MUST do 

> a major version bump when enabling a forward incompatible feature by default.

Author: I think this is general guidance and each can do there own versioning.  For parquet-java I think this will hopefully be binding.  As it stands I believe parquet-rs and parquet-cpp are effectively doing major version releases on each release.

> a major version bump when enabling a forward incompatible feature by default.

Author: this language has been walked back further, I think it tries to make clear that versioning is not a concern of the recommendations.

### License
By contributing your code, you agree to license your contribution under the terms of the APLv2:
https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/LICENSE

### Additions/Changes to the Format

Note: This section applies to actual functional changes to the
specification. Fixing typos, grammar, and clarifying concepts
that would not change the semantics of the specification can
be done as long a comitter feels comfortable to merge them. When
in doubt starting a discussion on the dev mailing list is 
encouraged.

The general steps for adding features to the format are as follows:

> 1. Discuss changes on on the developer mailing list (dev@parquet.apache.org).  Often times it is helpful to link to a draft pull request to make the discussion concrete. This step is complete when there lazy consensus.

Reviewer 11: You seem to be sometimes line wrapping and sometimes you're not. Should we have a consistent line wrapping style?

Author: Apologies, just pushed a commit to make it more consistent (used line wrapping and reflowed text)

2. Once a change has lazy consensus two implementations of the feature
demonstrating interopability must also be provided.  One implementation MUST be [parquet-java](http://github.com/apache/parquet-java).  It is preferred that the second implementation be [parquet-cpp](https://github.com/apache/arrow) or [parquet-rs](https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs), however at the discretion of the PMC any
open source Parquet implementation may be acceptable. Implementations
whose contributors actively
participate in the community (e.g. keep their feature matrix
up-to-date on parquet-site) are more likely to be considered.

Unless otherwise discussed, it is expected the implementations will
develop from the main branch (i.e. backporting is not expected).

In some cases in addition to library level implementations it is 
expected the changes will be justified via integration into a

> processing engine to show their viability.

Reviewer 9: IIUC, the intent here is to demonstrate some real world benefit to justify the cost. For instance, for the recent size statistics addition we probably should have required some benchmark numbers showing a clear benefit to justify the cost of creating and storing them. My GPU workflow was made much faster due to the inclusion of the unencoded byte array size information and could have provided hard numbers demonstrating that. Similarly, it would have been nice to have a pushdown example that was made possible because of the histograms. Simply adding the feature and showing that two implementations produced them in a compatible way was probably insufficient.

> processing engine to show their viability.

Author: I tried to rephrase and in a new pull request moved this to step 1.

and it is expected the changes from step 2 will also be merged soon after. Before merging into Parquet-java a parquet-format release
must be performed.

#### General guidelines/preferences on additions.

1. To the greatest extent possible changes should have an option for forwards compatibility (old readers can still read files).
2. New encodings should be fully specified in this repository and ideally not rely on an external dependencies for implementation (i.e. Parquet is the source of truth for the encoding).
3. New compression mechanisms must have a pure Java implementation that can be used as dependency in parquet-java.

### Releases

The Parquet community aims to do releases of the format package only as needed when new features are introduced.
If multiple new features are being proposed simultaneously some features might be consolidated into the same release.  Guidance is provided below on when implementations should enable features added to the specification.
Due to confusion in the past over parquet versioning it is not expected that there will be a 3.0 release of the specification in the foreseeable future.

### Compatibility and Feature Enablement

> For the purposes of this discussion we classify features into the following buckets:

Author: I used "features" here specifically to try to narrow this down, I'm trying to reword it to see I can accurately capture your concern.

> For the purposes of this discussion we classify features into the following buckets:

Author: @pitrou please let me know if you still have concerns on the language.

> For the purposes of this discussion we classify features into the following buckets:

Reviewer 4: It looks good to me now, thanks.

1. Backwards compatible.  A file written by an older version of a library can be read by a newer version of the

> library.

Author: changed to use your wording (will be present in next commit).

2. Forwards compatible.  A file written by a new version of the library can be read by an older version

> of the library. 

Author: changed to use your wording (will be present in next commit).

3. Forward compatible with suboptimal performance. A file written by a new version of the library can
be read an older version of the library but performance might be suboptimal (e.g. statistics might be missing
from the older reader's perspective).

4. Forward incompatible. A file written with a new version of the library cannot be read by an older version
of the library.

The Parquet community hopes that new features are widely beneficial
to users of Parquet, and therefore third-party implementations will

> adopt them quickly after they are introduced. It is assumed that most new features will be implemented behind a feature flag that defaults to "off".To avoid, compatibility issues across the ecosystem some amount of lead time is desirable to ensure a critical mass of Parquet implementations support a feature.  Therefore, the Parquet PMC gives the following guidance for changing a feature to be "on" by default:

Author: clarified language to indicate forward incompatible features.

1. Backwards compatibility is the concern of implementations but given the ubiquity of Parquet and the length
of time it has been used, libraries SHOULD support reading older
file variants.

2. Forward compatible changes MAY be used by default in implementations once the parquet-format containing
those changes has been formally released. These features SHOULD be turned on 1 year after the parquet-java

> implementation containing feature is released (e.g. it is expected

Reviewer 4: I don't think this "SHOULD" is really warranted. While the Java implementation is still the "primary" one from a community POV, that doesn't mean that everything that the Java implementation supports should be blindly turned on by default.

Author: @pitrou I changed a bunch of wording around to be less prescriptive, please let me know if this addresses your concerns.

Author: Per this feedback and @alamb I removed all upper case SHOULD/MUST/MAY statements to avoid confusion.

#### General guidelines/preferences on additions.

1. To the greatest extent possible changes should have an option for forward
   compatibility (old readers can still read files). The 'compatibility and

>    feature enablement' section below provides more details on expectations for

Reviewer 7: I think you can do ```[compatibility and
   feature enablement](#compatibility-and-feature-enablement)```
